# GES-comp-echem User Guide

## `objects` submodule

The `objects` submodule contains the following classes, used to collect and store information about the system of interest:

* `System`: generic system object, such as a single molecule.
* `Ensemble`: ensemble object, intended as a collection of closely related `System` objects. For example, the ensemble of conformers generated by the corresponding **CREST** routine.
* `MDTrajectory`: iterator object containing data about molecular dynamics trajectories.

The `objects` module can either be imported as a whole:

```python
from compechem import objects
```

Alternatively, the individual classes can be imported separately:

```python
from compechem.objects import System
from compechem.objects import Ensemble
from compechem.objects import MDTrajectory
```

---

### `System` objects

A system object is initialized by providing a molecular geometry via a .xyz file:

```python
from compechem.objects import System
my_mol = System("path/to/xyz/my_mol.xyz")
```

Optionally, the following parameters can be provided (if not provided, some default values are set):

* `charge`: total charge of the system. Default: 0
* `spin`: total spin multiplicity of the system (2S+1, where S is the total spin angular momentum). Default: 1 (singlet)
* `periodic`: if `True`, system is periodic. Default: `False`
* `box_side`: (for periodic systems only), length of the simulation box (in Å)

Example of a periodic system of side 18.27 Å containing a cation radical:
```python
from compechem.objects import System
my_mol = System(
    "path/to/xyz/my_mol.xyz", 
    charge=1, 
    spin=2,
    periodic=True, 
    box_side=18.27,
)
```

Below is a list of all the available properties. These, as well as the initialization parameters above, can be accessed via the following syntax:

```python
my_prop = my_mol.property
```

* `name`: system name (by default, given by the input .xyz file name)
* `atomcount`: total number of atoms 
* `geometry`: list containing atom types and coordinates
* `flags`: list of all the warning/error flags raised for this specific system during the various calculations
* `energies`: dictionary containing the calculated electronic/vibronic energies, indexed by level of theory
* `properties`: dictionary containing the calculated properties, such as pKa